# Repeat elements workflow

This workflow uses RepeatModeler, RepeatMasker and Red (REpeat Detector) to detect repeated elements.

RepeatModeler is a software package for identifying and modeling de novo families of transposable elements (TEs). At the heart of RepeatModeler are three de novo repeat search programs (RECON, RepeatScout and LtrHarvest/Ltr_retriever) which use complementary computational methods to identify repeat element boundaries and family relationships from sequence data.

RepeatMasker is a program that analyzes DNA sequences for *interleaved repeats* and *low-complexity* DNA sequences. The result of the program is a detailed annotation of the repeats present in the query sequence, as well as a modified version of the query sequence in which all annotated repeats are present.

Red is an intelligent, rapid, accurate tool for detecting repeats de-novo on the genomic scale.

## Input dataset for RepeatModeler
- RepeatModeler requires a single input file, a genome in fasta format.

## Outputs dataset for RepeatModeler
- Two output files are generated:
    - summary file (.tbl)
    - fasta file containing alignments in order of appearance in the query sequence

## Input dataset for RepeatMasker
- ReapatMasker requires the fasta file generated by RepeatModeler

## Outputs datasets for RepeatMasker
- Five output files are generated:
    - a fasta file with masked genome
    - .gff3 file
    - a table summarizing the repeated content of the sequence analyzed
    - a file with statistics related to the repeated content of the sequence analyzed
    - a summary of the mutation sites found and the order of grouping


## Input dataset for Red
- Red requires a single input file, a genome in fasta format.

## Outputs dataset for Red
- Two output files are generated:
    - a fasta file with masked genome
    - a bed file 